Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Thursday emphasised the need for early resolution of pending water-related issues concerning southern States through joint meetings involving the Ministry of Jal Shakti, the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Inter-State Council, and the respective States.
Addressing the 31st Southern Zonal Council meeting at Mamallapuram near Chennai, Mr. Shah said while protecting the interests of one’s own State was not wrong, if it deprives other of water for years, no actual interest was being served.
He said linking major rivers, from the Brahmaputra to the Cauvery and the Godavari, could ensure India faces no water shortage for the next 100 years.
The meeting was attended by Chief Ministers C. Joseph Vijay (Tamil Nadu), N. Chandrababu Naidu (Andhra Pradesh), D.K. Shivakumar (Karnataka), and V.D. Satheesan (Keralam); Deputy Chief Minister Bhatti Vikramarka Mallu (Telangana); and Lieutenant-Governors K. Kailashnathan (Puducherry) and Admiral (retd.) D.K. Joshi (Andaman and Nicobar); and Lakshadweep Administrator Praful Patel.
According to a release, the southern States agreed with the Home Minister’s suggestion that the pending water disputes should be resolved expeditiously through mutual dialogue and constructive solutions.
Regarding issues concerning the division of assets and liabilities between Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, both States agreed to resolve them in consultation with the Union Home Ministry.
Mr. Shah said linking of rivers could facilitate the creation of multiple waterways, which would not only save fuel and improve the environment, but also provide a cost-effective transportation system. He stated that a dispute-free North India has been created by resolving river-sharing issues spanning from Kashmir to Uttar Pradesh.

‘Conduct swift probe’
He also called for swift investigation of cases of rape against women and children, and the early disposal of rape and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act cases through the implementation of Fast Track Special Courts (FTSC).
He also flagged malnutrition, stunting and the school dropout ratio as issues that would impact future generations. He recalled the fight against malnutrition initiated by Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh, which was eventually accepted across the country.
The Minister also called for a drug-free India. The Home Ministry has prepared a three-year road map in which the roles of several departments of the States and the Centre have been defined. “Until all departments of the Central government and all departments of all State governments join this movement, we will not be able to save the coming generation from this evil,” he said.
Mr. Naidu too described river-interlinking as a long-term solution. He proposed transferring more than 500 TMC of surplus floodwaters through the Godavari-Krishna-Penna-Cauvery linkage, saying the project could benefit Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.
He also called for the Ganga-Cauvery link to be taken up as a national project and suggested a dedicated coordination mechanism for southern river basins to ensure timely preparation of DPRs and statutory clearances.
Mr. Vijay, Mr. Shivakumar and Mr. Satheesan too spoke during the meeting.